<p align="center">
<img width="400px" src="https://uploads-ssl.webflow.com/5e7ceb09657a69bdab054b3a/5e7ceb09657a6937ab054bba_Black_Original%20_Logo.png">
</p>

---

<p align="center">
Build modern, graph-based applications on top of your streaming data in minutes.
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/memgraph/memgraph/blob/master/licenses/APL.txt">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-APL-green" alt="license" title="license"/>
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/memgraph/memgraph/blob/master/licenses/BSL.txt">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-BSL-yellowgreen" alt="license" title="license"/>
  </a>
  <a href="https://github.com/memgraph/memgraph/blob/master/licenses/MEL.txt" alt="Documentation">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MEL-yellow" alt="license" title="license"/>
  </a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/memgraph/memgraph">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/memgraph/memgraph/Release%20Ubuntu%2020.04/master" alt="build" title="build"/>
  </a>
  <a href="https://memgraph.com/docs/" alt="Documentation">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/documentation-Memgraph-orange" />
  </a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://memgr.ph/join-discord">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Discord-7289DA?style=for-the-badge&logo=discord&logoColor=white" alt="Discord"/>
  </a>
</p>

## :clipboard: Description

Memgraph is a streaming graph application platform that helps you wrangle your
streaming data, build sophisticated models that you can query in real-time, and
develop graph applications.

Memgraph directly connects to your streaming infrastructure. You can ingest data
from sources like Kafka, SQL, or plain CSV files. Memgraph provides a standard
interface to query your data with Cypher, a widely-used and declarative query
language that is easy to write, understand and optimize for performance. This is
achieved by using the property graph data model, which stores data in terms of
objects, their attributes, and the relationships that connect them. This is a
natural and effective way to model many real-world problems without relying on
complex SQL schemas.

Memgraph is implemented in C/C++ and leverages an in-memory first architecture
to ensure that you’re getting the best possible performance consistently and
without surprises. It’s also ACID-compliant and highly available.

## :floppy_disk: Download & Install

### Windows

[![Windows](https://img.shields.io/badge/Windows-Docker-0078D6?style=for-the-badge&logo=windows&logoColor=white)](https://memgraph.com/docs/memgraph/install-memgraph-on-windows-docker)
[![Windows](https://img.shields.io/badge/Windows-WSL-0078D6?style=for-the-badge&logo=windows&logoColor=white)](https://memgraph.com/docs/memgraph/install-memgraph-on-windows-wsl)

### macOS

[![macOS](https://img.shields.io/badge/macOS-Docker-000000?style=for-the-badge&logo=macos&logoColor=F0F0F0)](https://memgraph.com/docs/memgraph/install-memgraph-on-macos-docker)

### Linux

[![Linux](https://img.shields.io/badge/Linux-Docker-FCC624?style=for-the-badge&logo=linux&logoColor=black)](https://memgraph.com/docs/memgraph/install-memgraph-on-linux-docker)
[![Debian](https://img.shields.io/badge/Debian-D70A53?style=for-the-badge&logo=debian&logoColor=white)](https://memgraph.com/docs/memgraph/install-memgraph-on-debian)
[![Ubuntu](https://img.shields.io/badge/Ubuntu-E95420?style=for-the-badge&logo=ubuntu&logoColor=white)](https://memgraph.com/docs/memgraph/install-memgraph-on-ubuntu)
[![Cent
OS](https://img.shields.io/badge/cent%20os-002260?style=for-the-badge&logo=centos&logoColor=F0F0F0)](https://memgraph.com/docs/memgraph/install-memgraph-from-rpm)

You can find the binaries and Docker images on the [Download
Hub](https://memgraph.com/download) and the installation instructions in the
[official documentation](https://memgraph.com/docs/memgraph/installation).

## :zap: Features

- Run Python, Rust, and C/C++ code natively, check out the
  [MAGE](https://github.com/memgraph/mage) graph algorithm library
- Native support for machine learning
- Streaming support
- Replication
- Authentication and authorization
- ACID compliance

## :bookmark_tabs: Documentation

The Memgraph documentation is available at
[memgraph.com/docs](https://memgraph.com/docs).

## :question: Configuration

Command line options that Memgraph accepts are available in the [reference
guide](https://memgraph.com/docs/memgraph/reference-guide/configuration).

## :trophy: Contributing

The main purpose of this repository is to continue evolving Memgraph, making it
faster and easier to use. Development of Memgraph happens in the open on GitHub,
and we are grateful to the community for contributing bug fixes and
improvements. Read below to learn how you can take part in improving Memgraph.

### Code of Conduct

Memgraph has adopted a Code of Conduct that we expect project participants to
adhere to. Please read [the full text](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) so that you can
understand what actions will and will not be tolerated.

### Contributing Guide

Read our [contributing guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) to learn about our development
process and how to propose bug fixes and improvements.

### Internals

Read our
[internal](https://memgraph.notion.site/Memgraph-Internals-12b69132d67a417898972927d6870bd2)
docs to learn more about Memgraph's architecture, how to build the project from
source and how to start contributing. All information related to the database,
can be found in the aforementioned docs.

### :scroll: License

Memgraph Community is available under the [BSL
license](./licenses/BSL.txt).</br> Memgraph Enterprise is available under the
[MEL license](./licenses/MEL.txt).

<p align="center">
  <a href="#">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/⬆️back_to_top_⬆️-white" alt="Back to top" title="Back to top"/>
  </a>
</p>
