# Memgraph Community User License Agreement

This License Agreement governs your use of the Memgraph Community Release (the
"Software") and documentation ("Documentation").

BY DOWNLOADING AND/OR ACCESSING THIS SOFTWARE, YOU ("LICENSEE") AGREE TO THESE
TERMS.

1. License Grant

The Software and Documentation are provided to Licensee at no charge and are
licensed, not sold to Licensee. No ownership of any part of the Software and
Documentation is hereby transferred to Licensee. Subject to (i) the terms and
conditions of this License Agreement, and (ii) any additional license
restrictions and parameters contained on Licensor’s quotation, website, or
order form, Licensor hereby grants Licensee a personal, non-assignable,
non-transferable and non-exclusive license to install, access and use the
Software (in object code form only) and Documentation for Licensee’s internal
business purposes (including for use in a production environment) only. All
rights relating to the Software and Documentation that are not expressly
licensed in this License Agreement, whether now existing or which may hereafter
come into existence are reserved for Licensor. Licensee shall not remove,
obscure, or alter any proprietary rights notices (including without limitation
copyright and trademark notices), which may be affixed to or contained within
the Software or Documentation.

Licensor may terminate this License Agreement with immediate effect upon
written notice to the Licensee. Upon termination Licensee shall delete all
electronic copies of all or any part of the Software and/or the Documentation
resident in its systems or elsewhere.

2. Restrictions

Licensee will not, directly or indirectly, (a) copy the Software or
Documentation in any manner or for any purpose; (b) install, access or use any
component of the Software or Documentation for any purpose not expressly
granted in Section 1 above; (c) resell, distribute, publicly display or
publicly perform the Software or Documentation or any component thereof, by
transfer, lease, loan or any other means, or make it available for use by
others in any time-sharing, service bureau or similar arrangement; (d)
disassemble, decrypt, extract, reverse engineer or reverse compile the
Software, or otherwise attempt to discover the source code, confidential
algorithms or techniques incorporated in the Software; (e) export the Software
or Documentation in violation of any applicable laws or regulations; (f)
modify, translate, adapt, or create derivative works from the Software or
Documentation; (g) circumvent, disable or otherwise interfere with
security-related features of the Software or Documentation; (h) use the
Software or Documentation for any illegal purpose, in any manner that is
inconsistent with the terms of this License Agreement, or to engage in illegal
activity; (i) remove or alter any trademark, logo, copyright or other
proprietary notices, legends, symbols or labels on, or embedded in, the
Software or Documentation; or (j) provide access to the Software or
Documentation to third parties.

3. Warranty Disclaimer

THE SOFTWARE AND DOCUMENTATION ARE PROVIDED "AS IS" AND LICENSOR MAKES NO
WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ANY IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE OR NON
INFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTIES’ INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS OR OTHER
PROPRIETARY RIGHTS. NEITHER THIS LICENSE AGREEMENT NOR ANY DOCUMENTATION
FURNISHED UNDER IT IS INTENDED TO EXPRESS OR IMPLY ANY WARRANTY THAT THE
OPERATION OF THE SOFTWARE WILL BE UNINTERRUPTED, TIMELY, OR ERROR-FREE.

4. Limitation of Liability

Licensor shall not in any circumstances be liable, whether in tort (including
for negligence or breach of statutory duty howsoever arising), contract,
misrepresentation (whether innocent or negligent) or otherwise for: loss of
profits, loss of business, depletion of goodwill or similar losses, loss of
anticipated savings, loss of goods, loss or corruption of data or computer
downtime, or any special, indirect, consequential or pure economic loss, costs,
damages, charges or expenses.

Licensor's total aggregate liability in contract, tort (including without
limitation negligence or breach of statutory duty howsoever arising),
misrepresentation (whether innocent or negligent), restitution or otherwise,
arising in connection with the performance or contemplated performance of this
License Agreement shall in all circumstances be limited to GBP10.00 (ten pounds
sterling).

Nothing in this License Agreement shall limit Licensor’s liability in the case
of death or personal injury caused by negligence, fraud, or fraudulent
misrepresentation, or where it otherwise cannot be limited by law.

5. Technical Data

Licensor may collect and use technical information (such as usage patterns)
gathered when the Licensee downloads and uses the Software.  This is generally
statistical data which does not identify an identified or identifiable
individual.  It may also include Licensee’s IP address which is personal data
and is processed in accordance with our Privacy Policy. We only use this
technical information to improve our products.

6. Law and Jurisdiction

This License Agreement is governed by the laws of England and is subject to the
non-exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of England.
